# Labels

We utilize various labels across all repositories and have documented each of them here.

## Shared

These labels are shared across all software repositories.

### Priority

* `priority:0` - #ff0004 - Highest priority, urgent, drop everything and implement this *immediately*.
* `priority:1` - #d9383b - High priority, must be implemented soon.
* `priority:2` - #d9a938 - Medium priority, feels bad without implementation.
* `priority:3` - #3879d9 - Low priority, nice to have in the future.

### Types

* `type:code-quality` - #1630db - Addresses code quality.
* `type:testing` - #1630db - Addresses testing in some fashion.
* `type:documentation` - #1630db - Addresses documentation.
* `type:feature` - #1630db - New feature

### PR-Specific

Labels specific to pull requests.

* `pr:blocked` - Do not merge this.

### Misc

* `bug` - #db1616 - A confirmed or reported event of unexpected behavior

* `area` - #fbca04 - Describes what portion of the application is affected. Specific areas are unique to each repository and can be created on the fly as new features are added.
* `size` - *Generated by the [pull request size bot](https://github.com/marketplace/pull-request-size).*
* `proposal` - #389ed9 - Generally reserved for "something to consider", can be used for new feature requests or functional changes.
* `epic` - #b716db - Feature that requires significant effort to implement
* `good first issue` - #16db20 - Denotes something that is easy to implement and would make for a good initial contribution.
* `duplicate` - #cfd3d7 - Item is already implemented or reported elsewhere.

## Repository Specific

### API

Labels specific to the `otr-api` repository:

* `api:breaking-change` - #ff0004 - Denotes a breaking API change.

### Website

Labels specific to the `otr-web` repository:

* `design-pending` - #5319e7 - Needs UI/UX design before implementing.
* `type:ui/ux` - #1630db - Addresses UI/UX.
